And so with great joy, devotion, even courage, commitment, once we really keep with things,
we make these offerings and make these requests again and again, turn the wheel of Dharma.
My great masters who've really, through their own joy, devotion, and courage, and commitment,
have truly followed the path and ripened their own mind and through their great compassion
have given us all these beautiful, sublime, concise teachings to really drop into our
heart and mind and use as tools to reveal our own natural peace that's always been
here and wisdom.
And so with that, of course, is turning the wheel of our renunciation in our own minds
and hearts to receive these distilled nectars, to just truly think of enlightenment and peace
and fulfillment, not only for ourselves, but every single living being boundlessly throughout
all time and place, throughout all the realms, that our practice, our study, our meditation
can truly be a great unceasing benefit for all beings, having dispelled our own obscurations
and negative emotions.
And then, of course, as much as we can, connecting with the purity view of the three vatra states
and the perfection of our situation, turning the three wheels of the three vehicles practiced
indivisibly in our beautiful practice lineage.
How wonderful that we've come to do this and practice individually and together.
And so part of what we're always doing on these days, too, is just reflecting a little
bit upon the teachings and practices that we've heard from our great teachers, Kim Pose
and Rinpoche, Kim Junphold and Rinpoche, who in their own way, again, repeat in one voice
those of the great masters of the lineage of Buddha Shakyamuni and Guru Padmasambhava.
And so we have all these wonderful teachings and practices and we live, at least here,
I think for the most part, in a world that really is very active.
Very active in samsara level, you know, so many amazing ideas, brilliant ideas, so many
horrifying ideas and discouraging ideas, so many amazing things happening and so many
horrifying things happening and everything in between.
And we are so blessed to have all these wonderful dharma practices, which we truly have come
to with confidence and trust and joy and devotion and we're all practicing to the best of our
abilities and encouraging each other to continue.
How wonderful.
And then even with that, we can be very active with so many beautiful dharma teachings, so
many beautiful dharma practices.
So I'm also kind of just thinking again how important it is like Rinpoche has said and
all the great masters that as we practice, as we move, whether it's our formal practice
or as we're moving within our lives, really taking the time to reflect on how is my practice?
You know, how is our study?
How is our contemplation?
How is our actual meditation practice?
And again, not anybody else looking to our own mind and heart honestly, peacefully, joyfully
because it's this that is going to lead to fulfillment, all right?
So like I think Rinpoche mentioned many times is quote, you know, how the signs of an educated
person is that they tend to be more gentle and peaceful in their body, speech, mind demeanor.
Signs of realization are that, you know, less negative emotions.
And so of course, negative emotions can come all kinds of ways.
But they're simply right, just connecting with them from our basic ignorance onward
until all the echoing shake up of samsara's hopes and fears.
It's all happening with their own mind.
And again, we're here as beautiful practitioners.
So just again, encouragement as we go, use what Rinpoche always relates to as these three
great assistants at all times, until we're fully enlightened Buddhas, our mindfulness,
our alertness, our conscientiousness, really just, I mean, it's a simplest thing, but I'm
talking to myself too, just as we approach our lives, like just really checking in, you
know, examining for ourself, our own mind and heart, you know, how, how is my practice?
How is it developing?
How much do we all, I mean, again, this isn't anything new, but really truly being present.
How is my loving kindness? How instinctive and kind of normal is it as far as being part
of my, the atmosphere of my mind and heart in my days?
How is my joyful effort, my patience, my, you know, attunement to, you know, my commitments?
How's my concentration? How is my wisdom?
How much am I connecting with the four boundless wishes, you know?
How is my meditation, the quality of my meditation, you know, without judgment?
How much am I actually accumulating merit, accumulation merit practices?
How much am I really developing my ability for calm abiding and insight?
How much, you know, just to see how does my current motivation match up with my initial
motivation for Dharma practice and study?
And I guess with all of this, again, kind of reflecting upon just the busyness of our
world and the reification and deification of thoughts and ideas, which again can be
wonderful, but again, as we all know, it's what is going on in our mind and heart that
really makes all the difference.
And so, you know, the Buddha said so many times in so many ways, essentially, if we
want to really apply his teachings, we really must train in shamatha and vipassana, calm
abiding practice and insight.
Of course, all the other applications, but all the practices and medicate meditations
we can do that really bring all the the hearing the teachings and contemplations into our
mind and heart is through direct experience and our meditation.
So on every single level of the path, all the meditations, as we all know, they're all
come under the categories of calm abiding and insight meditation.
So how how stable is our again, as part of this thing we check in with how stable is
my ability to really relax and not be distracted to really relax and focus, whether it's a
full out simplest, calm abiding of, you know, just remaining with our breath, or as we might
add our visualizations and mantra recitations, you know, just watching ourselves and of course
coming back.
And through that great stability, then of course, we have that great ground to then begin to
truly reflect on our own mind nature of our mind.
So I kind of started, you know, again, the Buddha was saying, I knew everyone who wants
to practice follow my teachings and really apply them and train according to them should
practice in calm abiding and in insight with the wish to attain enlightenment for all sentient
beings, you know, the precious bodhicitta, which we do again every day with our nundra
practice.
Great compassion and loving kindness.
Of course, on the relative level, that's really just again, connecting with that motivation
and commitment before all the enlightened ones and Buddhas bodhisattvas, you know, to
attain enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, you know, with the four boundless
applying
the six paramitas.
And then on the ultimate level of bodhicitta, again, is that connecting with that insight
into the unfabricated unborn, ceaselessly arising by nature like the sky, pristine nature of
our Dharmakaya nature of our own mind, which again, we're doing with our practice.
And you know, there's all kinds of quotes, again, when, you know, bringing this back
to that just as a checking in process, not to be discouraged by our current temporary
emotional states, how much have we carried by them?
I don't know.
And of course, at least for me, it varies, right?
But not to be discouraged and just remember again, these words, the undeceiving words
of the Buddha, that just the thought of enlightenment of bodhicitta, enlightenment of all beings
and the motivation that all beings realize that the Buddha said, the merit of just that
thought is, if that could be made substantial, it would fill all, it would surpass all of
space.
It would surpass infinity, I mean, such is the nature.
And he also said, again, according to what our current capacities might be, he used the
analogy of the, of a diamond, or like, you know, like the diamond, the actual substantial
gem, the diamond gets in that liberation of Maitreya.
And then that the Buddha is saying something like, a diamond, even if it's shattered, there
might be just a fragment of a diamond, still, its brilliance outshines all of, you know,
the beautiful golden ornaments.
And then the Buddha said, even if we may not fully recognize the diamond of our bodhicitta,
meaning we might not have fully actualized our bodhicitta, or it might be a little weak,
but we still have the wish, the thought of bodhicitta.
That is also like outshines all of, you know, here he's making the metaphor and the levels
of realization of the path.
It outshines that diamond of bodhicitta intention of the bodhisattva, outshines all of the golden
ornaments of like the shravakas and the pratyaka buddhas.
And just like that little fragment of diamond is still worth a lot and will relieve poverty,
that little glimmer of bodhicitta is still going to dispel the poverty of samsaras eventually,
but right, but we're trying to keep with that and continue with our practice, you know,
and just also create more conditions for what is going to actually help us.
So even just looking at those simple, you know, qualities of the outer hermitage, the
inner hermitage, you know, as far as what are good circumstances for stabilizing our
ability to relax and focus, you know, while we're subject to conditions, then that means
we're just going to try to as much as we can be in a place that's healthy, where our basic
needs are covered, that's a healthy environment, you know, where there's not a lot of trouble
coming from others. And also on the inner level, we have less desire, more contentment,
less desire for just worldly, you know, kind of more extraneous things, and more contentment
with what we have and the riches of what we have. And we're able to, you know, kind of
abandon our negative emotions and actions and connect with positive activities and motivations
of our three doors. And then actually doing the practice, which again, I won't go over
instructions of shamatha, but relaxing, focusing. And then again, the basic, you know, conditions
for bringing out our insight and wisdom is, of course, what the precious teacher, the
teachings, hearing them, reflecting on them, meditating. Again, you know, in the beginning,
we might, again, in this level of checking in and just knowing like the Buddha says,
keep going, keep going, we want to move through all the paths, through all the stages of
realization
to full enlightenment for the benefit of all beings. And that first starts with having
some, even though it might be intellectual, some understanding of what's being said and
what the practice is. So we have that basic understanding, we have understanding. And
then that starts to, you know, we have realists begin to have more realization and that becomes
stabilized on the path. So again, just just like our faith and our devotion increases
as we expose ourselves more with our practice, our bodhicitta deepens and expands as we continue
with our practice, have more understanding of our practice. Our renunciation, our joy
and appreciation, our renunciation increases as we continue with our understanding of the
teachings and the practice. And as we continue with that, we begin to have more and more
glimpses in direct perception of the meaning of the words of the teachings and the ideas
we're hearing that we're so drawn to and feel comfort with, but really allowing them to
enter our experience. And even with that, we're still going to have our habitual patterns
and obscurations, but still continuing and purifying, accumulating our merit, purifying
our obscurations, admitting our mistakes and moving on, continuing to accumulate our merit
and acting to the best of our abilities with mindfulness, alertness, conscientiousness.
And we're going to be into that stability, the unshakable state of realization of like
of Buddhahood, where we truly are fully realized in of the three Vajras states of the three
Kaya state is completely pure and rely fully realized. And with that inseparable with that
is our bodhicitta fully unveiled and ripened effortlessly, naturally benefiting all beings,
renunciations complete. There's nothing, nothing to needed. And then I think Rinpoche said
that as far as these stages the Buddha gave us of like the stages of realization from
ordinary being, entering the path and this contemplating meditating all the way those
stages of realization up to Buddhahood, you know, what we know, we've heard the five paths,
the path of accumulation, the path of joining or application, the path of seeing, the path
of meditation, and the path of no more learning. So I think one, in one way in the teachings
Kenpoche said, when we first beginning the path, that's when we're just beginning to
have some understanding. And then we want to continue with application means we're joining,
we're joining what we've heard with our, our experience. And that's where our realization
we have more and more glimpses of realization and direct perception and of our freedom state
of our wisdom, our love, our compassion that's uncontrived, right? And real path of seeing
is that full blown realization that we see the direct directly, the complete openness,
the egolessness of ourselves and of all phenomena, right? And even then, on the path of meditation,
which is all through the other stages of the boomings of the bodhisattvas is when we're
stabilizing that realization and all the more subtle knowledge obscurations are being purified
until again, the path of no more learning, which is Buddhahood. Some get it quick, some
get it over three countless aons or more, but we want to keep with it. So maybe that's
enough talking for the moment. But my main point is, yeah, I think we all know it, but
we all have varied times of the season, varied things happening in our lives and in our world.
And just really want to encourage myself and all of us to really keep with this precious
opportunity and really do keep going. Like, you know, I think also in like the great Prajna
Paramita Mantra, Rinpoche's have mentioned many times, one of the meanings of that is also
all these stages of the path being fully realized. So just we keep going, we check in with our
qualities of how much we are actually embodying our values and of the Dharma and the world
and how much our ability to especially with our meditation to really be with that so easy
to be busy. And sometimes I know for myself, the only quiet moment in the day might be
to sit down and practice, but kind of moving through those stages of like just letting
go and relaxing and then really working on developing the ability to relax and not be
distracted to be able to focus and really follow the instructions we have considering
like looking to the nature of our mind, developing our wisdom, you know, holding the beautiful
union of our really fortunate outer circumstances with our inner treasure of our own qualities
of body, speech and mind. And with great devotion, thinking of our teachers who are the embodiment
and the full fruition of all the Buddhas of the three times, you know, that's the essence
of our practice, joy, appreciation, bodhicitta, pure perception, that's the essence of our
Anundra practice, that guru yoga that's pervading every aspect of purifying our obscurations,
connecting with wisdom, accumulating positive karma. It's all distilled here in our practice.
So we will do our practice. Thank you.